docs(contributing): add a contributing guide (#7585)
patternfly/patternfly: patternfly-docs/site/pages/guidelines.md

---
id: guidelines
title: Development Guidelines
---

# PatternFly development guidelines

Please enforce these guidelines at all times. Small or large, call out what's incorrect.

This set of rules establishes some constraints and conventions. If you're ever unsure about a convention or if a problem could be solved in a few different ways, reach out to the PatternFly community. Talk through the best approach, and update these guidelines when necessary.

## Table of contents

- [Architecture & Design Principles](#architecture--design-principles)
- [Development Standards](#development-standards)
- [CSS Guidelines](#css-guidelines)
- [Component Development](#component-development)
- [References](#references)

---

## Architecture & design principles

### Separation of UI structure concerns

PatternFly is made out of isolated and modular structures that fall into 2 categories:

#### Layouts

Layouts are the containers that allow for organizing and grouping its immediate children on the page.

> - A layout never imposes padding or element styles on its children.

Reviewer: This is actually false - we do impose spacing on flex children, for example.
```suggestion
- A layout never imposes element styles on its children.
```

---
id: guidelines
title: Development Guidelines
---

# PatternFly development guidelines

Please enforce these guidelines at all times. Small or large, call out what's incorrect.

> Every line of code should appear to be written by a single person, no matter the number of contributors.

Reviewer: This always amused me - does it really make sense?

> This set of rules generate some constraints and conventions. If you run into instances where a convention isn't obvious or a solution could be handled in a few different ways, contact the PatternFly community, have a conversation about how to handle it and update this guidelines when needed.

Reviewer: This paragraph seems awkward and the grammar isn't very good - maybe @edonehoo would have a suggestion?

The parent container of a component is prefixed with `-c` (after the PatternFly prefix `pf-` and version `v6-`), for example: `.pf-v6-c-alert` or `.pf-v6-c-button`.

> #### When to Create a New Component

Reviewer: Don't we use sentence case everywhere?
```suggestion
#### When to create a new component
```

As a general rule, create an extension to an element with BEM modifiers if it's a change of color or scale. If the change generates a new entity, then create a new component.

Repetition is better than the wrong abstraction.

> #### Additional Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Additional features
```

A utility class is prefixed with `-u` (after the PatternFly prefix `pf-`), for example: `.pf-v6-u-text-align-center`.

**Demos**

Demos show how components and layouts can be put together to build more complex structures.

- A demo never includes its own styles. If styling is necessary to implement a desired demo, then new components or layouts, or variants of the components or layouts used, should be created instead.
- A demo doesn't add any accessibility tags that aren't already in the components. All accessibility should be handled at the component level.

---

## Development standards

### HTML/CSS component requirements

**All components must:**

1. **Follow semantic HTML** patterns
2. **Include ARIA attributes** for accessibility
3. **Support keyboard navigation** where applicable
4. **Work across supported browsers** (latest 2 versions of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
5. **Be responsive** and work on mobile devices

> 6. **Support theming** through CSS custom properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Support theming** through design tokens
```

- Work with screen readers

### Browser support

PatternFly supports the latest two major versions of:
- Chrome
- Firefox  
- Safari
- Edge

---

## CSS guidelines

### Naming conventions

PatternFly follows BEM methodology with specific prefixes:

- **Components**: `.pf-v6-c-component-name__element--modifier`
- **Layouts**: `.pf-v6-l-layout-name__element--modifier`
- **Utilities**: `.pf-v6-u-utility-name--modifier`
- **Prefix all PatternFly classes** with `.pf-v6-`

### Variable System

PatternFly follows a two-layer theming system where **design token CSS variables** always inform **component variables**. Each one of those layers follow a set of very specific rules.

#### design token CSS variables

The main reason to have design token CSS variables is to maintain consistency across the design system. They adhere to the following rules:

- They are prefixed with `--pf-t--` and follow the formula `--pf-t--global--concept--property--modifier--state`.
  - a `concept` is something like a `spacer` or `font`.
  - a `property` is something like `size` or `color`.
  - a `modifier` is something like `100`, `200`, or `sm`.
  - and a `state` is something like `hover`, or `clicked`.

> - They are concepts, never tied to an element or component. This is incorrect: `--pf-t--global--h1--font--size`, this is correct: `--pf-t--global--font--size--800`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- They are concepts, never tied to an element or component. 
- Incorrect: `--pf-t--global--h1--font--size`
- Correct: `--pf-t--global--font--size--800`
```

For example a design token CSS variables setup would look like:

```scss
// --pf-t--global--concept--modifier
--pf-t--global--spacer--200: .5rem;
--pf-t--global--spacer--300: 1rem;
--pf-t--global--spacer--400: 1.5rem;

// --pf-t--global--property--modifier
--pf-t--global--font--size--600: 1.5rem;
--pf-t--global--font--size--700: 1.75rem;
--pf-t--global--font--size--800: 2.25rem;

// --pf-t--color--concept--modifier  
--pf-t--color--blue--10: #e0f0ff;
--pf-t--color--blue--30: #92c5f9;
--pf-t--color--blue--50: #0066cc;

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, design tokens have been grouped into palette, base, and semantic tokens. 
- Palette tokens are fundamental values like palette colors.
- Base tokens create a family of acceptable values for a concept like danger status.
- Semantic tokens assign meaningful relationships to tokens, like borders for things with danger status.

For example design tokens for setting up danger status styling would look like:

```scss
// Palette tokens
  --pf-t--color--red-orange--50: #f0561d;
  --pf-t--color--red-orange--60: #b1380b;
  --pf-t--color--red-orange--70: #731f00;

// Base tokens
  --pf-t--global--color--status--danger--100: var(--pf-t--color--red-orange--60);
  --pf-t--global--color--status--danger--200: var(--pf-t--color--red-orange--70);
  --pf-t--global--color--status--danger--300: var(--pf-t--color--red-orange--80);

// Semantic tokens 
  --pf-t--global--border--color--status--warning--clicked: var(--pf-t--global--color--status--warning--300);
  --pf-t--global--border--color--status--warning--default: var(--pf-t--global--color--status--warning--200);
  --pf-t--global--border--color--status--warning--hover: var(--pf-t--global--color--status--warning--300);

```
```

@mcoker @lucia does this make sense?

#### Component variables

> The second layer is scoped to themeable component custom properties. This setup allows for consistency across components, generates a common language between designers and developers, and gives granular control to authors. The rules are as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second layer is scoped to customizable component custom properties. This setup allows for consistency across components, generates a common language between designers and developers, and gives granular control to authors. The rules are as follows:
```

The parent container of a component is prefixed with `-c` (after the PatternFly prefix `pf-` and version `v6-`), for example: `.pf-v6-c-alert` or `.pf-v6-c-button`.

#### When to Create a New Component

As a general rule, create an extension to an element with BEM modifiers if it's a change of color or scale. If the change generates a new entity, then create a new component.

> **Repetition is better than the wrong abstraction.**

Reviewer: I don't think this needs to be bold.

### HTML/CSS component requirements

**All components must:**

1. **Follow semantic HTML** patterns
2. **Include ARIA attributes** for accessibility
3. **Support keyboard navigation** where applicable
4. **Work across supported browsers** (latest 2 versions of Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
5. **Be responsive** and work on mobile devices
6. **Support theming** through CSS custom properties
7. **Include comprehensive examples** showing different states
8. **Pass accessibility audits** using our aXe testing

### Accessibility requirements

- Meet WCAG 2.0 AA standards
- Include proper ARIA labels and roles
- Support keyboard navigation
- Provide sufficient color contrast
- Include focus indicators
- Work with screen readers

### Browser support

PatternFly supports the latest two major versions of:
- Chrome
- Firefox  
- Safari
- Edge

---

## CSS guidelines

### Naming conventions

PatternFly follows BEM methodology with specific prefixes:

- **Components**: `.pf-v6-c-component-name__element--modifier`
- **Layouts**: `.pf-v6-l-layout-name__element--modifier`
- **Utilities**: `.pf-v6-u-utility-name--modifier`
- **Prefix all PatternFly classes** with `.pf-v6-`

> ### Variables System

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Variable System
```

PatternFly follows a two-layer theming system where **CSS tokens** always inform **component variables**. Each one of those layers follow a set of very specific rules.

#### CSS tokens

The main reason to have CSS tokens is to maintain consistency across the design system. They adhere to the following rules:

- They are prefixed with `--pf-t--` and follow the formula `--pf-t--global--concept--property--modifier--state`.
  - a `concept` is something like a `spacer` or `font`.
  - a `property` is something like `size` or `color`.
  - a `modifier` is something like `100`, `200`, or `sm`.
  - and a `state` is something like `hover`, or `clicked`.
- They are concepts, never tied to an element or component. This is incorrect: `--pf-t--global--h1--font--size`, this is correct: `--pf-t--global--font--size--800`.

> For example a CSS token setup would look like:

Reviewer: for all the instances of "CSS token" I'd call them "design tokens" or "design token CSS variables"

  - `__element` refers to the element inside of the block (i.e., `__title`).
  - `--modifier` refers to a modifier class such as `.pf-m-danger`, and is prefixed with `m-` in the component variable (i.e., `--m-danger`).
  - `--state` is something like `hover` or `active`.
  - `--breakpoint` is a media query breakpoint such as `sm` for `$pf-global--breakpoint--xs`.
  - `--breakpoint` is a media query breakpoint such as `sm` for `--pf-t--global--breakpoint--sm`.
  - `--pseudo-element` is one of either `before` or `after`.
  - `--child`, `--tag`, or `--c-component` refers to a child element. It could be a tag or component name, like `--c-menu` or `--svg`, or it could use `--child` to refer to any child element. If any modifiers, states, breakpoints, or pseudo-elements are on the child, include those after this portion of the name.

> - The value of a component variable is **always** defined by a global variable.

Reviewer: I'd leave this and say "The value of a component variable should refer to a **semantic design token**."

For example:

```scss
// Component scoped variables are defined by design token variables
--pf-v6-c-alert--Padding: var(--pf-t--global--spacer--400);
--pf-v6-c-alert--hover--BackgroundColor: var(--pf-t--global--background--color--200);

> --pf-v6-c-alert__title--FontSize: var(--pf-t--global--font--size--700);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Component scoped variables are defined by semantic design token variables
--pf-v6-c-alert--FontSize: var(--pf-t--global--font--size--body--default);
--pf-v6-c-alert__title--Color: var(--pf-t--global--text--color--regular);
--pf-v6-c-alert--m-danger--BorderColor: var(--pf-t--global--border--color--status--danger--default);
```

  - `__element` refers to the element inside of the block (i.e., `__title`).
  - `--modifier` refers to a modifier class such as `.pf-m-danger`, and is prefixed with `m-` in the component variable (i.e., `--m-danger`).
  - `--state` is something like `hover` or `active`.
  - `--breakpoint` is a media query breakpoint such as `sm` for `--pf-t--global--breakpoint--sm`.
  - `--pseudo-element` is one of either `before` or `after`.
  - `--child`, `--tag`, or `--c-component` refers to a child element. It could be a tag or component name, like `--c-menu` or `--svg`, or it could use `--child` to refer to any child element. If any modifiers, states, breakpoints, or pseudo-elements are on the child, include those after this portion of the name.

> - The value of a component variable is **always** defined by a CSS token.

Reviewer: This is not strictly true; there are instances where a component variable is assigned something like `transparent`, a grid area name, or other explicit value. Also, "CSS token" isn't the terminology I'd use.
```suggestion
- The value of a component variable should be a design token.
```
@mcoker what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Yeah I'd probably just remove this bullet point, too. I think the point it's trying to make is to not make up/hard-code colors , font-sizes, border-widths... all of the stuff we have tokens for. But you're right - we use lots of values that are not tokens.

- It's possible to include multiple elements, modifiers, states, and breakpoints in a single component variable.
- The order of elements, modifiers, states, and breakpoints in the variable name should match the selector order.

For example:

```scss

> // Component scoped variables are always defined by CSS tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Component scoped variables are defined by design token variables
```

PatternFly has breakpoints defined as CSS custom properties:

```scss
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--xs: 0 !default; 
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--sm: 36rem !default; // 576px 
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--md: 48rem !default; // 768px 
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--lg: 62rem !default; // 992px 
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--xl: 75rem !default; // 1200px 
$pf-v6-global--breakpoint--2xl: 90.625rem !default; // 1450px 
```

To make sure you are writing mobile first, always do `min-width`:

```scss
.pf-nav {
  // mobile styles

  // Styles for small view ports and up
  @media (min-width: $pf-v6-global--breakpoint--sm) {
    // non-mobile styles
  }
}
```

3. **States, pseudo-classes, and pseudo-elements**

States of a component should be included as a nested element. This includes hover, focus, and active states:

```scss
.pf-v6-c-button {
  background: var(--pf-v6-c-button--Background);

  &:hover {
    background: var(--pf-v6-c-button--hover--Background);
  }
}
```

#### Sass variables

We create design token CSS variables to maintain consistency across the design system. These values also inform our component level variables.

#### Nested calc() functions

> There is currently a bug in cssnano ([issue #64 on postcss-calc](https://github.com/postcss/postcss-calc/issues/64)) that causes nested `calc()` CSS functions to be removed. So a function like `calc(5 * calc(3 - 1))` becomes `calc(5 * 3 - 1)`. It's worth noting that this problem only impacts our distribution package. Nested `calc()` functions work fine in the development environment.

Reviewer: This issues has been resolved.

.pf-v6-c-alert__title {
  font-size: var(--pf-v6-c-alert__title--FontSize);
}
```

#### Comment all magic values

If a situation arises where a value needs entering into the style sheets that isn't already defined in the CSS tokens this should serve as a red flag to you.

> In the case where a 'magic' value needs entering, ensure a comment is added on the line above to explain its relevance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case where a 'magic' value needs to be used, ensure a comment is added to explain its relevance.
```

* Do use that method to create compound selectors with modifier classes.

```scss
// Good
.pf-nav {
  // styles

  &.pf-m-vertical {
    // styles
  }
}

.pf-nav__item {
  // styles
}

// Bad
.pf-nav {
  // styles

  &__item {
    // styles
  }
}
```

2. **Media queries**

Component-specific media queries should be nested inside the component block. Remember that PatternFly is mobile first. **Do progressive enhancement, not graceful degradation.**

PatternFly has breakpoints defined as CSS custom properties:

```scss
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--xs: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--100);
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--sm: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--200);
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--md: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--300);
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--lg: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--400);
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--xl: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--500);
--pf-t--global--breakpoint--2xl: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--600);
```

To make sure you are writing mobile first, always do `min-width`:

```scss
.pf-nav {
  // mobile styles

  // Styles for small view ports and up

>   @media (min-width: var(--pf-t--global--breakpoint--sm)) {

Reviewer: I think this needs to be a SCSS variable instead of a CSS variable.

Reviewer 2: Yeah @nicolethoen for context, CSS vars don't work in `@media` queries currently. On the dev side (for this doc), we'll use the SCSS vars below. If you're a product, you'd use:
* SCSS vars if you have access to them // preferred, will always match what PF uses for a breakpoint
* react-token values for the breakpoints // preferred, same as above
* literal size values (eg, `36rem` or `576px`)

https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/f81a8c499fe1bbbe568470de45ae1d555454e4c9/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/scss-variables.scss#L29-L35

    // non-mobile styles
  }
}
```

> 3. **States, pseudo-classes and pseudo-elements**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **States, pseudo-classes, and pseudo-elements**
```
Oxford comma is a hill I'll die on. :-)

States of a component should be included as a nested element. This includes hover, focus, and active states:

```scss
.pf-v6-c-button {
  background: var(--pf-v6-c-button--Background);

  &:hover {
    background: var(--pf-v6-c-button--hover--Background);
  }

> }

Reviewer: Should we add a pseudoelement then, since the heading mentions it but it's not shown?

Author: Could you provide an example of that? I wouldn't be sure what to add.

Reviewer: Sure, something like
`// --block--pseudoelement--PropertyCamelCase
.pf-v6-c-alert {
  &::after {
    border-color: var(--pf-v6-c-alert--after--BackgroundColor);
  }
}`

```

#### Sass variables

We create CSS tokens to maintain consistency across the design system. These values also inform our component level variables.

#### @mixin and @extend

> Since our components are isolated and modular try to avoid `@mixin` and `@extend` because they generate a dependency.

Reviewer: We have a number of mixins, so I'm not sure if we want to include this?

#### Nested calc() functions

There is currently a bug in cssnano ([issue #64 on postcss-calc](https://github.com/postcss/postcss-calc/issues/64)) that causes nested `calc()` CSS functions to be removed. So a function like `calc(5 * calc(3 - 1))` becomes `calc(5 * 3 - 1)`. It's worth noting that this problem only impacts our distribution package. Nested `calc()` functions work fine in the development environment.

> PatternFly developers should avoid nested `calc()` CSS functions until this bug is resolved and the package is updated in the [patternfly repository](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly). If you're interested in following this issue, you can do so in [issue #1295 on patternfly](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/issues/1295).

Reviewer: I _think this_ issue has been resolved so we can remove this.

// Good
.element {

>   margin-bottom: var(--pf-t--global--spacer--sm);

Reviewer: Let's update this to use logical directions
```suggestion
  margin-block-end: var(--pf-t--global--spacer--sm);
```
